[FLINK-21926][doc] Add docs for fine-grained resource management (#16561)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/deployment/finegrained_resource.md

---
title: Fine-Grained Resource Management
weight: 5
type: docs

---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

# Fine-Grained Resource Management

> Apache Flink allows you to control the resource consumption of your workload in a finer granularity, namely **fine-grained resource management**.
> It provides means for users to further improve Flink’s resource efficiency with knowledge of their specific scenarios. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Flink works hard to auto-derive sensible default resource requirements for all applications out of the box. 
For users who wish to fine-tune their resource consumption, based on knowledge of their specific scenarios, Flink offers **fine-grained resource management**.
```

I want to make it clear to new users that you don't have to do this.

This page describes the fine-grained resource management’s usage, applicable scenarios, and how it works.

{{< hint warning >}}
**Note:** This feature is currently an MVP (“minimum viable product”) feature and only available to [DataStream API]({{< ref "docs/dev/datastream/overview" >}}).
{{< /hint >}}

## Applicable Scenarios

Typical scenarios that potentially benefit from fine-grained resource management are where:

  - Tasks have significantly different parallelisms.

  - The resource needed for an entire pipeline is too much to fit into a single slot/task manager.

  - Batch jobs where resources needed for tasks of different stages are significantly different

An in-depth discussion on why fine-grained resource management can improve resource efficiency for the above scenarios is presented in [How it improves resource efficiency](#how-it-improves-resource-efficiency).

## How it works

As described in [Flink Architecture]({{< ref "docs/concepts/flink-architecture" >}}#anatomy-of-a-flink-cluster),
the resource for task execution in TaskManager is split into a bunch of slots, where job tasks are scheduled.

> The slot is the basic unit of both resource scheduling and resource requirement in Flink runtime.

Author: Maybe `Flink's`?

{{< img src="/fig/dynamic_slot_alloc.png" class="center" >}}

> Previously in Flink, the resource requirement only contained the number of the required slots, without fine-grained resource
> profiles, namely **coarse-grained resource management**. The TaskManager contained a fixed number of identical slots to fulfill those requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I moved this down

In fine-grained resource management, the slots are requested with specific resource profiles, which can be specified by users.
Flink will respect those user-specified resource requirements and dynamically cut an exactly-matched slot out of the TaskManager’s available
resources. As shown above, there is a requirement for a slot with 0.25 Core and 1GB memory and Flink allocates *Slot 1* for it.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< hint info >}}
Previously in Flink, the resource requirement only contained the number of the required slots, without fine-grained resource
profiles, namely **coarse-grained resource management**. The TaskManager contained a fixed number of identical slots to fulfill those requirements.
{{< /hint >}}

> For the resource requirement without a specified resource profile, Flink will automatically decide the resource profile of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the resource requirement without a specified resource profile, Flink will automatically decide a resource profile.
```

val ssgA = SlotSharingGroup.newBuilder("a")
  .setCpuCores(1.0)
  .setTaskHeapMemoryMB(100)
  .build()

val ssgB = SlotSharingGroup.newBuilder("b")
  .setCpuCores(0.5)
  .setTaskHeapMemoryMB(100)
  .build()

someStream.filter(...).slotSharingGroup("a") // Set the slot sharing group with name “a”
.map(...).slotSharingGroup(ssgB) // Directly set the slot sharing group with name and resource.

env.registerSlotSharingGroup(ssgA) // Then register the resource of group “a”
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab "Python" >}}
```python
env = StreamExecutionEnvironment.get_execution_environment()

ssg_a = SlotSharingGroup.builder('a') \
            .set_cpu_cores(1.0) \
            .set_task_heap_memory_mb(100) \
            .build()
ssg_b = SlotSharingGroup.builder('b') \
            .set_cpu_cores(0.5) \
            .set_task_heap_memory_mb(100) \
            .build()

some_stream.filter(...).slot_sharing_group('a') # Set the slot sharing group with name "a"
.map(...).slot_sharing_group(ssg_b) # Directly set the slot sharing group with name and resource.

env.register_slot_sharing_group(ssg_a) # Then register the resource of group "a"
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> <div class="alert alert-info">
>      <strong>Note:</strong> Each slot sharing group can only attach to one specified resource, any conflict will fail the compiling of your job.
> </div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< hint warning >}}
**Note:** Each slot sharing group can only attach to one specified resource, any conflict will fail the compiling of your job.
{{< /hint >}}
```

  - For batch jobs, not all the tasks can be executed at the same time. Thus, the instantaneous resource requirement of the pipeline changes over time.

Trying to execute all tasks with identical slots can result in non-optimal resource utilization. The resource of the identical slots
has to be able to fulfill the highest resource requirement, which will be wasteful for other requirements. When expensive external resources
like GPU are involved, such waste can become even harder to afford. The fine-grained resource management leverages slots of different resources
to improve resource utilization in such scenarios.

### Resource Allocation Strategy

In this section, we talk about the slot partitioning mechanism in Flink runtime and the resource allocation strategy, including how
the Flink runtime selects a TaskManager to cut slots and allocates TaskManagers on [Native Kubernetes]({{< ref "docs/deployment/resource-providers/native_kubernetes" >}})
and [YARN]({{< ref "docs/deployment/resource-providers/yarn" >}}). Note that the resource allocation strategy is pluggable in
Flink runtime and here we introduce its default implementation in the first step of fine-grained resource

> management. In the future, there might be various strategies that can be selected for different scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
management. In the future, there might be various strategies that users can select for different scenarios.
```
